Add detailed design to clarify the field keyword spec and incorporate all LDM decisions (#8069)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/semi-auto-properties.md

Reviewer: suggest renaming to `field-keyword.md` or something like that. Doesn't need to be in this PR, just something to get to at some point.

Author: Yes! I had that in mind ASAP, but didn't do it in this PR so that review was easier.

Author: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/8264

# `field` keyword in properties

## Summary

Extend all properties to allow them to reference an automatically generated backing field using the new contextual keyword `field`. Properties may now also contain an accessor _without_ a body alongside an accessor _with_ a body.

## Motivation

Auto properties only allow for directly setting or getting the backing field, giving some control only by placing access modifiers on the accessors. Sometimes there is a need to have additional control over what happens in one or both accessors, but this confronts users with the overhead of declaring a backing field. The backing field name must then be kept in sync with the property, and the backing field is scoped to the entire class which can result in accidental bypassing of the accessors from within the class.

> There are two common scenarios in particular: applying a constraint on the setter to ensuring the validity of a value, and raising an event such as `INotifyPropertyChanged.PropertyChanged`.

Reviewer 2: Should this be "to **ensure** the validity"?

## Glossary

- **Auto property**: Short for "automatically implemented property" ([§15.7.4](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v7/standard/classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)). Accessors on an auto property have no body. The implementation and backing storage are both provided by the compiler. Auto properties have `{ get; }`, `{ get; set; }`, or `{ get; init; }`.

- **Auto accessor**: Short for "automatically implemented accessor." This is an accessor that has no body. The implementation and backing storage are both provided by the compiler. `get;`, `set;` and `init;` are auto accessors.

- **Full accessor**: This is an accessor that has a body. The implementation is not provided by the compiler, though the backing storage may still be (as in the example `set => field = value;`).

## Detailed design

For properties with an `init` accessor, everything that applies below to `set` would apply instead to the `init` accessor.

There are two syntax changes:

1. There is a new contextual keyword, `field`, which may be used within property accessor bodies to access a backing field for the property declaration.

> 2. Properties may now mix and match auto accessors with full accessors. "Auto property" will continue to mean a property whose accessors have no bodies. None of the examples below will be considered auto properties.

Reviewer 2: > Properties may now mix and match auto accessors with full accessors.

Was there an explicit language design decision to allow a mix within a property? I couldn't find a reference to this in the LDM notes.

Author: There was not an explicit decision that I'm aware of. This was part of the reason I wanted to have the LDM see this. @CyrusNajmabadi

Reviewer 2: Let's add an explicit question to the "Open LDM questions" section below.

> 1. Can a property be declared with one auto-implemented accessor *and* one explicitly-implemented accessor.

I realize that case is included in the current question "Which of these scenarios should be allowed to compile?" but it would be good to be explicit about this specific case.

Reviewer 3: i could have sworn this was already decided by ldm.

Author: Well, it was the entire feature name: semi-auto properties. This is a property that is half automatically implemented, half manually implemented. It was just not explicitly recorded. I added an open question so we can capture this, though I don't expect it to be seen as an update from the original intention.

Reviewer 2: That's interesting. I think I assumed "semi-auto" in the feature name referred to the fact the backing field was automatically generated.

```cs
class C
{
    public C()
    {
        P1 = 1; // Assigns P1's backing field directly
        P2 = 2; // Assigns P2's backing field directly
        P3 = 3; // Calls P3's setter
        P4 = 4; // Calls P4's setter
    }

    public int P1 => field;
    public int P2 { get => field; }
    public int P4 { get => field; set => field = value; }
    public int P3 { get => field; set; }
}
```

### Definite assignment in structs

Even though they can't be referenced in the constructor, backing fields denoted by the `field` keyword are subject to default-initialization and disabled-by-default warnings under the same conditions as any other struct fields ([LDM decision 1](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#property-assignment-in-structs), [LDM decision 2](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#definite-assignment-of-manually-implemented-setters)). For example:

```cs
public struct S
{
    public S()
    {
        _ = P1; // Disabled-by-default warning
        P2 = 5; // Disabled-by-default warning

>     }

Reviewer 2: When I read "disabled-by-default warning", I initially interpreted that as a warning for a feature named "disabled-by-default". Consider rewording, and perhaps include the warning. Also, what is the warning for the second statement `P2 = 5;`?

Perhaps:
```
_ = P1; // warning CS9018: P1 is read before assignment (warning is disabled by default)
P2 = 5; // ... what is the warning?
```

Reviewer: The sample muddied the waters a bit. But imagine the body only contains one or the other of these statements. In that case we need to implicitly assign the fields of 'this' and will report diagnostics (which 99.99% of users will leave disabled by default)

Author: I separated into two samples and documented the exact diagnostics.

### Nullability

When `{ get; }` is written as `{ get => field; }`, or `{ get; set; }` is written as `{ get => field; set => field = value; }`, a similar warning should be produced when a non-nullable property is not initialized:

```cs
class C
{
    // ⚠️ CS8618: Non-nullable property 'P' must contain a
    // non-null value when exiting constructor.
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

No warning should be produced if the property is initialized to a non-null value via constructor assignment or property initializer:

```cs
class C
{
    public C() { P = ""; }

    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

```cs
class C
{
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; } = "";
}
```

In the same vein as how `var` infers as nullable for reference types, the `field` type is the nullable type of the property whenever the property's type is not a value type. Otherwise, `field ??` would appear to be followed by dead code, and it avoids producing a misleading warning in the following example:

```cs
public string AmbientValue
{
    get => field ?? parent.AmbientValue;
    set
    {
        if (value == parent.AmbientValue)

>             field = null; // No warning here. Resume following the parent's value.

Reviewer 2: Was it an LDM decision to treat `field` as nullable, or should this be an open question?

# `field` keyword in properties

## Summary

Extend all properties to allow them to reference an automatically generated backing field using the new contextual keyword `field`. Properties may now also contain an accessor _without_ a body alongside an accessor _with_ a body.

## Motivation

Auto properties only allow for directly setting or getting the backing field, giving some control only by placing access modifiers on the accessors. Sometimes there is a need to have additional control over what happens in one or both accessors, but this confronts users with the overhead of declaring a backing field. The backing field name must then be kept in sync with the property, and the backing field is scoped to the entire class which can result in accidental bypassing of the accessors from within the class.

> There are two common scenarios in particular: applying a constraint on the setter to ensure the validity of a value, and raising an event such as `INotifyPropertyChanged.PropertyChanged`.

Reviewer 3: nit: add a common scenario of "returning a default value in the case where a property has never been given a value".

Reviewer 3: primarily because this seems to only indicate value for `field` in `set;` and i'd like us to indicate value in `get;` as well.

Since `field` is a keyword and not an identifier, it can only be "shadowed" by an identifier using the normal keyword-escaping route: `@field`. All identifiers named `field` declared within property accessor bodies can safeguard against breaks when upgrading from C# versions prior to 13 by adding the initial `@`.

### Field-targeted attributes

As with auto properties, any property that uses a backing field in one of its accessors will be able to use field-targeted attributes:

```cs
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => field ??= Compute();

[field: Xyz]
public string Name { get => field; set => field = value; }
```

A field-targeted attribute will remain invalid unless an accessor uses a backing field:

```cs
// ❌ Error, will not compile
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => Compute();
```

### Property initializers

Properties with initializers may use `field`. The backing field is directly initialized rather than the setter being called ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#open-questions-in-field)).

> Calling a setter for an initializer is not an option; initializers are processed before calling base constructors, and it is illegal to call any instance method before the base constructor is called. This is also important for default initialization/definite assignment of structs.

Reviewer 3: This would also not work in any sensible fashion in the presence of virtual properties.

    {
        if (RuntimeHelpers.Equals(location, value))
            return false;

        location = value;
        HasPendingChanges = true;
        return true;
    }
}
```

This difference in behavior between a property initializer and assigning from the constructor can also be seen with virtual auto properties in previous versions of the language:

```cs
using System;

// Nothing is printed; the property initializer is not
// equivalent to `this.IsActive = true`.
_ = new Derived();

class Base
{
    public virtual bool IsActive { get; set; } = true;
}

class Derived : Base
{
    public override bool IsActive
    {
        get => base.IsActive;
        set
        {
            base.IsActive = value;
            Console.WriteLine("This will not be reached");
        }
    }
}
```

### Constructor assignment

As with auto properties, assignment in the constructor calls the setter if it exists, and if there is no setter it falls back to directly assigning to the backing field.

```cs
class C
{
    public C()
    {
        P1 = 1; // Assigns P1's backing field directly
        P2 = 2; // Assigns P2's backing field directly
        P3 = 3; // Calls P3's setter

>         P4 = 4; // Calls P4's setter

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        P4 = 4; // Calls P4's setter, including through virtual dispatch
```

(or mention that in the sentence above this.  and mention that's how this has always worked in the constructor).

```cs
class C
{
    // ⚠️ CS8618: Non-nullable property 'P' must contain a
    // non-null value when exiting constructor.
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

No warning should be produced if the property is initialized to a non-null value via constructor assignment or property initializer:

```cs
class C
{
    public C() { P = ""; }

    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

```cs
class C
{
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; } = "";
}
```

#### Open question: nullability of `field`

In the same vein as how `var` infers as nullable for reference types, the `field` type is the nullable type of the property whenever the property's type is not a value type. Otherwise, `field ??` would appear to be followed by dead code, and it avoids producing a misleading warning in the following example:

```cs
public string AmbientValue
{
    get => field ?? parent.AmbientValue;
    set
    {
        if (value == parent.AmbientValue)

>             field = null; // No warning here. Resume following the parent's value.

Reviewer 4: This feels wrong to me. Feel like this should be a warning and users complaining about that warning would be evidence that we should expand the feature in the future to allow explicit declaration of the field type.

Author: Great consideration, being discussed in WG.

In these cases by now you always have to create an instance field and write the whole property yourself.  This not only adds a fair amount of code, but it also leaks the `field` into the rest of the type's scope, when it is often desirable to only have it be available to the bodies of the accessors.

## Detailed design

For properties with an `init` accessor, everything that applies below to `set` would apply instead to the `init` accessor.

> **Principle 1:** Every property can be thought of as having a backing field by default, which is elided when not used. The field is referenced using the keyword `field` and its visibility is scoped to the accessor bodies.

Reviewer 4: Consider discussing how `override` plays into this. For example consider the following: 

```csharp
public override string Prop { get => field ?? "default" };
```

In this case does `field` represent a value on the current type or am I accessing the value in the base type? Essentially does every declaration of a property have a backing field or is it only when there is a new slot?

Reviewer: I think the design should align with precedent for existing auto-properties, where declaring an override auto-property adds a field to the containing type (in which the override is declared).

Derived types don't have knowledge of whether a property on a base type is auto-implemented. I think we should keep it that way for this feature as well.

Reviewer 4: > I think the design should align with precedent for existing auto-properties, where declaring an override auto-property adds a field to the containing type (in which the override is declared).

That seems like a fine interpretation but I think we should make that very explicit in the proposal here. 

Now ... same question but for explicit interface implementations.

Author: Thanks, updated!

**Principle 2:** `get;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `get => field;`, and `set;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `set => field = value;`.

This means that properties may now mix and match auto accessors with full accessors. For example:

```cs
{ get; set => Set(ref field, value); }
```

```cs

> { get => field ?? GetDefault(); set; }

Reviewer 4: Nit: 

```suggestion
{ get => field ??= GetDefault(); set; }
```

Wouldn't the `??=` variant make more sense here?

Author: Yes, it's a typo! Thanks! I'll also take the opportunity to say `GetAmbientDefault()` to clarify the use case.

Author: Deleted my previous reply, I wasn't thinking. I was thinking of this as more like `GetCurrentAmbientValue()`, e.g. `?? parent?.Foo`. I'll clarify.

```

> Both accessors may be full accessors with either one or both making use of `field`:

Reviewer 4: Consider using a non-expression body accessor example below to make it abundantly clear that `field` can be used in all accessor styles.

```cs
{ get => field; set => field = value; }
```

```cs
{ get => field; set => throw new InvalidOperationException(); }
```

```cs
{ get => overriddenValue; set => field = value; }
```

Expression-bodied properties and properties with only a `get` accessor may also use `field`:

```cs
public string LazilyComputed => field ??= Compute();
```

```cs
public string LazilyComputed { get => field ??= Compute(); }
```

A special case is made to prevent properties with only a `set` accessor from using `field` because there would be no way to access the value of `field` except in subsequent sets, when it will be presumed to be overwritten.

```cs
// ❌ Error, will not compile
public string Why { set => field = value; }

> ```

Author: @CyrusNajmabadi Should this perhaps also apply when the getter does not reference `field`?

### Field-targeted attributes

Just as with regular auto-properties, any property that uses a backing field in one of its accessors will be able to use field-targeted attributes:

```cs
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => field ??= Compute();

[field: Xyz]
public string Name { get => field; set => field = value; }
```

A field-targeted attribute will remain invalid unless an accessor uses a backing field:

```cs
// ❌ Error, will not compile
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => Compute();
```

### Constructor assignment

Just like with existing auto-properties, assignment in the constructor calls the setter if it exists, and if there is no setter it falls back to directly assigning to the backing field.

```cs
class C
{
    public C()
    {
        P1 = 1; // Assigns P1's backing field directly
        P2 = 2; // Assigns P2's backing field directly
        P3 = 3; // Calls P3's setter
    }

    public int P1 => field;
    public int P2 { get => field; }
    public int P3 { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

> ### Property initializers

Reviewer 3: i would flip this and constructor-assignment.

As with existing auto-properties, assignment in the constructor calls the setter if it exists, and if there is no setter it falls back to directly assigning to the backing field.

```cs
class C
{
    public C()
    {
        P1 = 1; // Assigns P1's backing field directly
        P2 = 2; // Assigns P2's backing field directly
        P3 = 3; // Calls P3's setter
    }

    public int P1 => field;
    public int P2 { get => field; }
    public int P3 { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

### Definite assignment in structs

A semi-auto property will be treated as a regular auto property for the purposes of calculating default backing field initialization if its setter is automatically implemented, or if it does not have a setter ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#property-assignment-in-structs)).

Default initialize a struct when calling a manually implemented semi-auto property setter, and issue a warning when doing so, like a regular property setter ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#definite-assignment-of-manually-implemented-setters)).

> ### Nullability

Author: @RikkiGibson Would you be able to take a look at this section and tell me if there's more to do here? Thank you!

Reviewer: I will try and think this through in more details. But off the cuff. I am thinking that we are going to have "gaps" here in nullable analysis which we will have to be comfortable with. We will have to err on the side of assuming things are non-null and assuming we shouldn't warn in order to avoid giving nuisance warnings which don't have an obvious way to be silenced.

When `{ get; }` is written as `{ get => field; }`, or `{ get; set; }` is written as `{ get => field; set => field = value; }`, a similar warning should be produced when a non-nullable property is not initialized:

```cs
class C
{
    // ⚠️ CS8618: Non-nullable property 'P' must contain a
    // non-null value when exiting constructor.
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

> No warning should be produced if the property is initialized to a non-null value via constructor assignment or property initializer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No warning should be produced if the property is initialized to a non-null value via constructor assignment or field initializer:
```

IIRC they are still called field initializers even when used in a property.

Author: The spec uses the term "property initializer":

> An auto-property may optionally have a property_initializer, which is applied directly to the backing field as a variable_initializer ([§17.7](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/arrays#177-array-initializers)).

And:

```antlr
property_body
    : '{' accessor_declarations '}' property_initializer?
    | '=>' expression ';'
    ;

property_initializer
    : '=' variable_initializer ';'
    ;
```

```cs
class C
{
    public C() { P = ""; }

    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

```cs
class C
{
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; } = "";
}
```

> For reference-typed fields, the `field` type should be nullable. No warning should be produced in the following example:

Reviewer: If we did this then `string P { get => field; }` would report a warning (converting `string?` to `string`).

Author: It would be great to avoid this being an error though:
```cs
public string P
{
    get => field ?? parent.P;
    set
    {
        if (value == parent.P)
            field = null;
        else
            field = value;
    }
}
```

Reviewer: Let's add a test for this property, decorated with `[field: MaybeNull]`.

Reviewer: Well. Let's say it's an open question. But if we were to support what you are describing I would use attributes.

Author: Implicit `[field: AllowNull]` on a non-nullable `field` type would work for this situation, and equally so would implicit `[field: NotNull]` on a nullable `field` type. I'd prefer the latter since you'd see the nullable field type on hover, like you do with `var`.

Author: I hear you on the status as an open question. I'll have to flesh out the open questions section to show that much of these updates are open questions since the LDM has not explicitly considered some of these outcomes.

Author: Updated with the design I'd like to see, and rationale.

```cs
class C
{
    public string P => field ??= "test";
}
```

### `nameof`

> `nameof(field)` will be disallowed. It is not like `nameof(value)`, which is the thing to use when property setters throw ArgumentException as some do in the .NET core libraries. In contrast, `nameof(field)` has no expected use cases. If it did anything, it would return the string `"field"`, consistent with how `nameof` behaves in other circumstances by returning the C# name or alias, rather than the metadata name.

Reviewer 4: Think we should have a "Breaking Changes" section where items like this are discussed. This is a breaking change for anyone using `nameof(field)` today inside of a property accessor. 

Also is this an error or warning?

Author: Is the breaking change specific to `nameof(field)` or simply following from the meaning of `field` itself changing?

Author: I'd suggest an error, just like `nameof(nint)`.

Reviewer 4: It's following from the meaning of `field` changing. Based on the spec I would expect the following to succeed in C# 12 bit result in a diagnostic for C# 13. 

```csharp
public int field;
public string Prop
{
  get => "example {nameof(field)}";
}
```

Reviewer 4: > I'd suggest an error, just like nameof(nint).

Thought LDM reviewed this and was considering having `nameof(keyword)` work but result in a warning. Did we decide to keep the current behavior of error? If so ... may want to try and revisit that. The current behavior is adding upgrade friction that could be avoided.

Author: @jaredpar Last time I was in the loop my understanding was, compiler vNext warns as long as your langversion is 12 or lower, and interprets `field` as a keyword when your langversion is 13+.

Reviewer 4: > For nameof(field) specifically, last time I was in the loop my understanding was that compiler vNext would warn as long as your langversion is 12 or lower, and would interpret field as a keyword when your langversion is 13+ with all the consequences that keywordness entails.

Doesn't that lead to a situation though where multi-targeting becomes very difficult? Lets say that you use the constant `"field"` as that will compile in both C# 12 and 13. Won't the C# 12 target sart to issue warnings / infos saying you should use `nameof(field)` instead of a constant? Or does that all get handled correctly?

These type of issues always feel to me like we're creating problems where we don't need to. Every tweak like this is just another rule that generators, code style, analyzers, has to learn and adapt to. As opposed to say allowing `nameof(...)` anything and issuing a warning (which is easy to silence) for specific keywords.

Author: It's a great point about unnecessary upgrade pain. I'll think of some full examples of how this will go with both `field` on its own and (the likely comparatively rarer) `nameof(field)`, upgrading through various means including manual `<LangVersion>` edits.

Author: @jaredpar The scenario I've thought of where the C# 12 target will issue warning or info recommending `nameof(field)` is if `field` is the name of a parameter _and_ you're passing the string to an `ArgumentException`. (<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fundamentals/code-analysis/quality-rules/ca1507#cause>) `field` as the name of the property is another possibility, but someone would have had to already started turning off linting warnings for not using pascal casing.

However, you can't legitimately throw ArgumentException directly from an accessor body with `"field"`, since `"field"` is not the metadata name of a parameter of the accessor method. So if the linter is giving you trouble, it's pointing the way to a bigger issue worth fixing.

Considering local functions and lambdas inside an accessor body which may declare a parameter called `field` and throw such an ArgumentException, which the linter may recommend `nameof(field)` for, the LDM decision is that this parameter is shadowing the property's backing field, and so `nameof(field)` would not produce an error.

(https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/7964 confirms that `field` is only a keyword within property accessors, and together with the shadowing rule, we can be sure that the IDE will not produce warnings in C# 13 for `nameof(field)` unless it's being improperly used in the first place.)

I'll flesh out the section to clarify all this.

Author: Come to think of it, I don't think the nature of the break with `nameof(field)` is any different (or should be any different) than the nature of the break with `M(field);` when its meaning changes. The `nameof` error falls out of that same essential break when `field` starts meaning something different.

Author: @jaredpar I pushed a much smaller update, since it's out of scope for me in this PR to update the speclet to propose _any_ breaking changes at all (it's still only an open question at the end). That'll need to be done. The way I'm seeing it, the `nameof(field)` break is one and the same with the `field` break itself, and what we really need to contend with is what happens if you use `field` when multitargeting 12 and 13.

In these cases by now you always have to create an instance field and write the whole property yourself.  This not only adds a fair amount of code, but it also leaks the `field` into the rest of the type's scope, when it is often desirable to only have it be available to the bodies of the accessors.

## Detailed design

For properties with an `init` accessor, everything that applies below to `set` would apply instead to the `init` accessor.

**Principle 1:** Every property declaration can be thought of as having a backing field by default, which is elided when not used. The field is referenced using the keyword `field` and its visibility is scoped to the accessor bodies.

> **Principle 2:** `get;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `get => field;`, and `set;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `set => field = value;`.

Author: I should clarify that this is only the case in locations where these shorthands indicate an auto property, so not for abstract/interface/partial properties.

Reviewer: I would just link to the auto-implemented properties section of the standard which includes these qualifications and the partial properties spec is modifying.

This means that properties may now mix and match auto accessors with full accessors. For example:

```cs
{ get; set => Set(ref field, value); }
```

```cs
{ get => field ?? parent.AmbientValue; set; }
```

Both accessors may be full accessors with either one or both making use of `field`:

```cs
{ get => field; set => field = value; }
```

```cs
{ get => field; set => throw new InvalidOperationException(); }
```

```cs
{ get => overriddenValue; set => field = value; }
```

```cs
{
    get;
    set
    {
        if (field == value) return;

>         field == value;

Reviewer 5: `field = value;`

In these cases by now you always have to create an instance field and write the whole property yourself.  This not only adds a fair amount of code, but it also leaks the `field` into the rest of the type's scope, when it is often desirable to only have it be available to the bodies of the accessors.

## Detailed design

For properties with an `init` accessor, everything that applies below to `set` would apply instead to the `init` accessor.

> **Principle 1:** Every property declaration can be thought of as having a backing field by default, which is elided when not used. The field is referenced using the keyword `field` and its visibility is scoped to the accessor bodies.

Reviewer: What I was trying to get at in a separate comment thread, and will reiterate here is: I don't think this is a useful framing.

I think this framing implies that the compiler can simplify the way it handles properties by making an assumption that the backing field exists, until some particular phase where it needs to finally decide for sure, but I don't think this is true. It's not a "late-bound" decision, e.g. which we can wait until the lowering or emit layer to decide on it. It affects the results and meaning of initial binding, and the answers for whether a diagnostic should be reported when taking a pointer to a type, nullable analysis, the result of `GetMembers()` public API, and probably several other things.

I think it would be more useful here to be specific and say that the backing field exists or not based on whether a contextual keyword is being used in the property accessors. Basically, our design has accounted for the need for the compiler to make a decision about whether the field exists relatively early on.

Reviewer 2: Are the Principles necessary? It looks like the update below to §14.7.4 Automatically implemented properties fully describes when the backing field is available. Consider removing the Principles to avoid an extra concept.

Reviewer 2: The update to *§14.7.4 Automatically implemented properties* should be first.

Reviewer 3: i like things like this because they guide intuition on how to think about the feature space as a whole.  Properties are simply wrappers around fields that can run code.  but the lang considers the field something that a supporting impl is free to elide.

---

In terms of *when* it elides, we can hten have another section describing that.  but it aligns with the principles laid out here.

Author: The principles help to organize the thinking around the proposal and future updates in this area, compared to inferring from the concrete individual changes. I would really like to have them be considered (and potentially, rejected) at a philosophical level, which then is an inherent part of the design.

Author: I have removed the framing of "every property has a backing field" (restated as "every property can make use of a backing field"), and the framing of "get;" and "set;" being syntactic sugar over `=> field` and `=> field = value;`, which guided our design. I'd like to come back to them, but I don't want to overload the focus on the other open questions for now.

**Principle 2:** `get;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `get => field;`, and `set;` will now be considered syntactic sugar for `set => field = value;`.

> Both of these principles only apply under the same conditions where `{ get; }` or `{ get; set; }` already declares an auto property ([§15.7.4](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v7/standard/classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)). Indexers also remain unaffected.

Reviewer 3: it might be worth calling out that this means an abstract-property or interface-property with `{ get; }` retains its current meaning.

> This means that properties may now mix and match auto accessors with full accessors. For example:

Reviewer 3: "auto accessor" is an interesting name.  Is it somethign we already use elsewhere?  It might be worth defining it above to ensure it's clear what that is referring to.

Reviewer 3: similarly, what a "full accessor" is.   

Something as simple as "we call accessors without a body  (e.g. `get;` and `set;`) an "auto accessor".  We call accessors with a body (e.g. `get { ... }` and `get => ...`) a "full accessor".

Author: The spec introduces "auto-property" as short for "automatically-implemented property," so what I would reach for to address this is introducing "auto-accessor" as short for "automatically-implemented accessor."

Reviewer 3: i think that's fine.  I think we should start though with a glossery of terms we want to use here and what they mean.  :)

```cs
{ get; set => Set(ref field, value); }
```

```cs
{ get => field ?? parent.AmbientValue; set; }
```

Both accessors may be full accessors with either one or both making use of `field`:

```cs
{ get => field; set => field = value; }
```

```cs
{ get => field; set => throw new InvalidOperationException(); }
```

```cs
{ get => overriddenValue; set => field = value; }
```

```cs
{
    get;
    set
    {
        if (field == value) return;
        field = value;
        OnXyzChanged();
    }
}
```

Expression-bodied properties and properties with only a `get` accessor may also use `field`:

```cs
public string LazilyComputed => field ??= Compute();
```

```cs
public string LazilyComputed { get => field ??= Compute(); }
```

As with regular auto-properties, a setter that uses a backing field is disallowed when there is no getter. This restriction could be loosened in the future to allow the setter to do something only in response to changes, by comparing `value` to `field` (see open questions).

```cs
// ❌ Error, will not compile
{ set => field = value; }
```

### Field-targeted attributes

> As with regular auto-properties, any property that uses a backing field in one of its accessors will be able to use field-targeted attributes:

Reviewer 3: i both like that we're claling this out, but would like a different way of phrasing it.  Basically, i would say that `[field: ...]` can be used on an auto prop.  And as these new properties are auto-props that continues to apply.

Author: I don't like that we would call these auto-props, actually. The principle is that every field has a backing field, elided if unused. `{ get => field; set => field = value; }` is not an auto-prop or else every property is an auto prop because it has `field` available (elided if unused).

Thus my strong resistance to titling the feature "semi-auto props" and my relief that it switched to "`field` keyword"

Reviewer: I think the concept of "it always exists but might be elided" doesn't quite track for me. It perhaps depends at which stage is the thing elided.
- Is it elided for purposes of struct circularity checks? It must be, otherwise `struct S { S Prop { get => ...; } }` is broken, but that does work today.
- Is it elided for purposes of public API? e.g. if I ask the property symbol for the "AssociatedField" when the field is not used, do I get a symbol back? (I might have the details wrong, but this still seems relevant, I think the backing fields are exposed through the public APIs.)

Basically my expectation is that we introduced `field` as a contextual keyword in accessors and this gives us the ability to decide if the field is being used with a pure syntactic check and not actually binding anything. Does the model of "not using `field` causes it to be elided" have a difference in practice from "an implicit field is added to containing type when `field` is used"?

Reviewer 3: it's 'elided' conceptually at the lang level.  Meaning it simply does not exist.  As such, for things like "Struct circularity" since it does not exist it does not effect things.

Elided just means 'does not exist', and everything else should flow from that.  It's not 'it exist,s but it not emitted'.  IMO.

Author: And also, I should have said, even apart from the 'elide' concept, I still don't think `{ get => field; set => field = value; }` is in the spirit of what the spec meant by "automatically implemented" just because the backing field can be referred to by a keyword instead of manually _declared_.

Reviewer: Currently, "is it an auto property" is conflated with the question "does it have an implicit backing field". I am open to these concepts being separated as part of this proposal, but we'll have to be careful to thread that change all the way through the spec and the implementation.

Author: I added a clarification to that effect.

```cs
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => field ??= Compute();

[field: Xyz]
public string Name { get => field; set => field = value; }
```

A field-targeted attribute will remain invalid unless an accessor uses a backing field:

```cs
// ❌ Error, will not compile
[field: Xyz]
public string Name => Compute();
```

### Property initializers

Properties with initializers may use `field`. The backing field is directly initialized rather than the setter being called ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#open-questions-in-field)).

Calling a setter for an initializer is not an option; initializers are processed before calling base constructors, and it is illegal to call any instance method before the base constructor is called. This is also important for default initialization/definite assignment of structs.

> This luckily gives control over whether or not you want to initialize the backing field directly or call the property setter: if you want to initialize without calling the setter, you use a property initializer. If you want to initialize by calling the setter, you use assign the property an initial value in the constructor.

Reviewer 3: i'd leave out luckily.  Maybe say "This allows for flexible control over initialization.  In cases where initializing the backing field is desired, a property initializer can be utilized.  In cases..."

> Here's an example of where this is useful. The `field` keyword will find a lot of its use with view models because of the neat solution it brings for the `INotifyPropertyChanged` pattern. View model property setters are likely to be databound to UI and likely to cause change tracking or trigger other behaviors. The following code needs to initialize the default value of `IsActive` without setting `HasPendingChanges` to `true`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here's an example of where this is useful. We believe the `field` keyword will find a lot of its use with view models because of the elegant solution it brings for the `INotifyPropertyChanged` pattern. View model property setters are likely to be databound to UI and likely to cause change tracking or trigger other behaviors. The following code needs to initialize the default value of `IsActive` without setting `HasPendingChanges` to `true`:
```

```cs
using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;

class SomeViewModel
{
    public bool HasPendingChanges { get; private set; }

    public bool IsActive { get; set => Set(ref field, value); } = true;

    private bool Set<T>(ref T location, T value)
    {

>         if (RuntimeHelpers.Equals(location, value)) return false;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        if (RuntimeHelpers.Equals(location, value))
            return false;
           
```

Author: 😭 okay :D

```cs
using System;

// Nothing is printed; the property initializer is not
// equivalent to `this.IsActive = true`.
_ = new Derived();

class Base
{
    public virtual bool IsActive { get; set; } = true;
}

class Derived : Base
{
    public override bool IsActive
    {
        get => base.IsActive;
        set
        {
            base.IsActive = value;
            Console.WriteLine("This will not be reached");
        }
    }
}
```

### Constructor assignment

As with existing auto-properties, assignment in the constructor calls the setter if it exists, and if there is no setter it falls back to directly assigning to the backing field.

```cs
class C
{
    public C()
    {
        P1 = 1; // Assigns P1's backing field directly
        P2 = 2; // Assigns P2's backing field directly
        P3 = 3; // Calls P3's setter
        P4 = 4; // Calls P4's setter
    }

    public int P1 => field;
    public int P2 { get => field; }
    public int P4 { get => field; set => field = value; }
    public int P3 { get => field; set; }
}
```

### Definite assignment in structs

> A semi-auto property will be treated as a regular auto property for the purposes of calculating default backing field initialization if its setter is automatically implemented, or if it does not have a setter ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#property-assignment-in-structs)).

Author: ‼️yes

> Default initialize a struct when calling a manually implemented semi-auto property setter, and issue a warning when doing so, like a regular property setter ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#definite-assignment-of-manually-implemented-setters)).

Reviewer 3: might be good to have examples of these cases here.

Author: @RikkiGibson Would this be the right pair of examples?

```cs
public struct C
{
    public C()
    {
        _ = P; // No warning
    }

    public int P { get => field; }
}
```

```cs
public struct C
{
    public C()
    {
        P = 5; // No warning
    }

    public int P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

Reviewer: Change `No warning` to `Disabled-by-default warning` and you got it.

Author: Hmm. With disabled-by-default warning, is it a separate warning from the one that I'm about to say will not be shown based on the LDM decision link? Full thing I'm about to say:

> Default-initialize a struct when calling a manually implemented setter of a property which uses an automatic backing field, and issue a warning when doing so, like a regular property setter ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#definite-assignment-of-manually-implemented-setters)). That enables the following code to compile without warning "CS9020: The 'this' object is read before all of its fields have been assigned, causing preceding implicit assignments of 'default' to non-explicitly assigned fields":
> 
> ```cs
> public struct S
> {
>     public S()
>     {
>         P = 5; // Only a disabled-by-default warning
>     }
> 
>     public int P { get => field; set => field = value; }
> }
> ```

Similar question for the other code block.

Reviewer: I think I'm confused by the language here. It seems like the spec is saying "default-initialize, and report a warning, so that we don't have to report this other particular warning."

I think the spec shouldn't concern itself with the specific ID or message of the warning, it should just say that the warning is reported and whether the warning is enabled by default.

I would just say that the field(s) denoted by the `field` keyword are subject to default-initialization and disabled-by-default warnings under the same conditions as any other struct fields--such as when a manually-implemented property setter is called before the fields are assigned--even though such fields are not directly referenceable in the constructor. Then include the samples.

Author: Do you feel that the linked LDM decisions are explained in sufficient detail here, or should I add more?

> Even though they can't be referenced in the constructor, backing fields denoted by the `field` keyword are subject to default-initialization and disabled-by-default warnings under the same conditions as any other struct fields. ([LDM decision 1](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-02.md#property-assignment-in-structs), [LDM decision 2](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#definite-assignment-of-manually-implemented-setters)). For example:
> 
> ```cs
> public struct S
> {
>     public S()
>     {
>         _ = P1; // Disabled-by-default warning
>         P2 = 5; // Disabled-by-default warning
>     }
> 
>     public int P1 { get => field; }
>     public int P2 { get => field; set => field = value; }
> }
> ```

Author: Updated. I did confirm that the warning is only present up to one time at a time in the constructor.

### Nullability

When `{ get; }` is written as `{ get => field; }`, or `{ get; set; }` is written as `{ get => field; set => field = value; }`, a similar warning should be produced when a non-nullable property is not initialized:

```cs
class C
{
    // ⚠️ CS8618: Non-nullable property 'P' must contain a
    // non-null value when exiting constructor.
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

No warning should be produced if the property is initialized to a non-null value via constructor assignment or property initializer:

```cs
class C
{
    public C() { P = ""; }

    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; }
}
```

```cs
class C
{
    public string P { get => field; set => field = value; } = "";
}
```

> In the same vein as how `var` infers as nullable for reference types, the `field` type should be nullable for reference types. This makes sense of `field ??` as not being followed by dead code, and it avoids producing a misleading warning in the following example:

Reviewer 3: "this makes sense of" reads strangely.

> In the same vein as how `var` infers as nullable for reference types, the `field` type should be nullable for reference types. This makes sense of `field ??` as not being followed by dead code, and it avoids producing a misleading warning in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the same vein as how `var` infers as nullable for reference types, the `field` type is the nullable type of the property whenever the property's type is not a value type. This makes sense of `field ??` as not being followed by dead code, and it avoids producing a misleading warning in the following example:
```

Note: the distinction here is that we will infer `T?` for unconstrained generics.  Stating 'reference types' would exclude that.

```cs
public string AmbientValue
{
    get => field ?? parent.AmbientValue;
    set
    {
        if (value == parent.AmbientValue)
            field = null; // No warning here. Resume following the parent's value.
        else
            field = value; // Stop following the parent's value
    }
}
```

> Just like with nullability of `var`, it's expected that such patterns will exist with manually-declared backing fields.

Reviewer 3: I'm not certain what this means.

> To land in this sweet spot implicitly, without having to write an attribute each time, nullability analysis will combine an inherent nullability of the field with the behavior of `[field: NotNull]`. This allows maybe-null assignments without warning, which is desirable as shown above, while simultaneously allowing a scenario like `=> field.Trim();` without requiring an intervention to silence a warning that `field` could be null. Making sure `field` has been assigned is already covered by the warning that ensures non-nullable properties are assigned by the end of each constructor.

Reviewer 3: i think i'm good with this.  Though it doesn't mean you wouldn't get a warning here right:

```c#
public string AmbientValue
{
    get => field;  // Could return null now!
    set
    {
        if (value == parent.AmbientValue)
            field = null; // No warning here. Resume following the parent's value.
        else
            field = value; // Stop following the parent's value
    }
}
```

Might be worth calling this out, but with the caveat that we think the number of false negatives will be far fewer and less impactful than if we had too many false positives.

Author: You would not get that warning on `get => field;` because of `[field: NotNull]`. I'll test again to make sure I didn't make a mistake in testing that.

Reviewer 3: right.  i'm saying: that's slightly problematic here, as the field *can* be null, and you could null ref.  But that we believe in aggregate the benefits here outweigh the problems.

Author: I think that scenario is well handled by the warning if you don't assign non-null properties in a constructor, which begins to apply here like it does with autoprops.

Author: Oops, I'm sorry, I didn't see at first that the `??` had been removed in the getter. I see your point: this is a bad setup and warnings would be nice, but we don't have a non-onerous way to provide them. I'll call that out.

### `nameof`

> In places where `field` is a keyword (see the [Shadowing](#shadowing) section), `nameof(field)` will fail to compile, like `nameof(nint)`. It is not like `nameof(value)`, which is the thing to use when property setters throw ArgumentException as some do in the .NET core libraries. In contrast, `nameof(field)` has no expected use cases. If it did anything, it would return the string `"field"`, consistent with how `nameof` behaves in other circumstances by returning the C# name or alias, rather than the metadata name.

Reviewer 3: i would remove the 'if it did anything' part.  we've said it is not legal, so talkign about what to do if it were legal isn't necessary (and i think makes things a little confusing)

### Overrides

Overriding properties may use `field`. Such usages of `field` refer to the backing field for the overriding property, separate from the backing field of the base property if it has one. There is no ABI for exposing the backing field of a base property to overriding classes since this would break encapsulation.

> Like with regular auto properties, semi-auto properties that override a base property must override all accessors ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-05-02.md#partial-overrides-of-virtual-properties)).

Reviewer 3: "semi-auto" again?

### Shadowing

> `field` can be shadowed by parameters or locals in a nested scope ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-02-16.md#open-questions-in-field)). Since `field` represents a field in the type, even if anonymously, the shadowing rules of regular fields should apply.

Reviewer 3: oh.  this feels like soemthign that deviates from how i remember, or how i think we may have talked about thsi recently.  i *thought* we were going with an approach that since it is a keyword now in a property setting, that you just literally could not write a parameter/local called `field`.  So no shadowing cases exist.

Note: this depends on us going with the 'breaking change' approach here.

### Captures

> `field` should be able to be captured in local functions and lambdas, and references to `field` from inside local functions and lambdas should be allowed even if there are no other references ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-21.md#open-question-in-semi-auto-properties)):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`field` should be able to be captured in local functions and lambdas, and references to `field` from inside local functions and lambdas are allowed even if there are no other references ([LDM decision](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2022/LDM-2022-03-21.md#open-question-in-semi-auto-properties)):
```

}
```

## Open LDM questions

> 1. Should it be disallowed to pair a manually implemented accessor with an automatically implemented accessor? An original guiding principle for the design was that, in places where `get; set;` defines an auto property, `get;` is now considered syntax sugar for `get => field;` and `set;` is now short for `set => field = value;`. This allowance was encoded in the original name for the feature, "semi-auto properties," where half the property would be automatically implemented and the other half would not be automatically implemented.

Reviewer 2: Consider using `###` sections for the questions rather than numbers.

Author: Thanks, done.
